The Project Gutenberg eBook of Nazareth: a morality in one act, by
Laurence Housman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Nazareth: a morality in one act

Author: Laurence Housman

Release Date: December 27, 2022 [eBook #69644]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Carla Foust and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NAZARETH: A MORALITY IN ONE
ACT ***





  Nazareth: a Morality in
  One Act: by Laurence
  Housman




  Samuel French: Publisher
  28-30 West Thirty-eighth Street: New York
  LONDON
  Samuel French, Ltd.
  26 SOUTHAMPTON STREET, STRAND




  Copyright, 1916
  By LAURENCE HOUSMAN


  CAUTION.--Amateurs and Professionals are hereby warned that
   “NAZARETH,” being fully protected under the copyright laws of the
   United States, is subject to royalty, and any one presenting the play
   without the consent of the author or his authorized agent, will be
   liable to the penalties by law provided. Application for the right
   to produce “NAZARETH” must be made to Samuel French, 28-30 West 38th
   Street, New York City.


  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.




NAZARETH.




PROLOGUE.


    Since Love first looked on life with human eyes,
    Twixt him and us time like a curtain lies.
    Of all the years while He made life His own
    With dear familiar touch--how little’s known!
    The gospels of His Birth, the tale make plain
    Then two years till He died and rose again,
    Naught else remains to us of all, save when
    He, at Jerusalem, with learned men
    Was by His parents found, and taken thence
    Back to far Nazareth. And by no sense
    Of mortal mind from where they now lie hid
    Can we recover the fair things He did,
    Growing to man’s estate, that He might die
    For man’s salvation; hidden there they lie,
    The days which mounted up to Calvary.

    Yet here on earth that lovely deed was done;
    Love in man’s form took life from wind and sun,
    Waked, slept, ate bread, and toiled, and without speed,
    Patient, made test of each frail weak human need;
    Found means on small frail feet men’s ways to go;
    From mother tongue was taught man’s speech to know;
    So, for man’s making, childhood, boyhood, youth,
    Each he endowed in turn with deathless truth,
    Himself the type and pattern for each stage
    Of human growth. Oh! in what future age
    Shall we who, seeking that lost Pattern, roam,
    Find it again, and to that form come home?

    Ah, friends! this simple showing that ye see
    Of Love at Nazareth, this is not He!
    ’Tis but a thought, a fathering wish, a prayer
    That with hearts knit we may come closelier there,
    Where He lived lowly. Lo, He by your side
    Lies hidden, a waiting guest, still multiplied
    By man’s still growing needs,--with such intent
    He made humanity His Sacrament;
    The flesh and blood, which here we beat and bruise,
    Is Christ’s. Ah, put it to some better use!
    Be members all with all! Hear what Love saith,
    And make your home with Him at Nazareth!




NAZARETH


 SCENE:--_The Carpenter’s shop is a low, broad chamber built of wood.
     At the back to the left-center a wide open doorway reveals a level
     stretch of landscape. It is late afternoon, but the air is still
     pale with the heat of day. To the right of the door is a small
     square window with wooden shutters thrown wide; before it stands a
     carpenter’s bench upon which lies a wooden door frame nearly
     finished. The carpenter and his assistant are quietly at work
     planing, and boring holes for the fitting in of the rivets; beneath
     them the floor is strewn with shavings, saw-dust, and odds and ends
     of wood. Away to the left, near a spinning wheel, sits an aged
     woman combing flax. Against the wall to the same side of the
     doorway sits_ MARY, _the carpenter’s wife, with a book upon her
     knees; on the other side her son stands against the door-post, with
     his back to the interior, looking out into the sunshine._

     _After the scene has opened the carpenter raises himself from a
     stooping position, and hands over to_ REUBEN, _his assistant, a
     beam of wood, which the latter lays aside._

CARPENTER. ’Twill soon be done. Nay, we’ll not need that now. Yes,
speak on. If you read slowly enough, I can give heed.

MARY. (_Reading_). “Because his visage was so marred, many did marvel
at him then, for more than most his form was scarred, yea, more than
all the sons of men. Yet him shall all the nations hear, and kings
shall shut their mouths for fear.”

CARPENTER. (_To_ REUBEN) Be careful, now the cross-beam’s laid.

OLD ANNA. What cause have kings to be afraid?

MARY. (_Reading_) “Who hath believed our report? To whom is the Lord’s
arm revealed? He shall grow up in tender sort, and as a root from a dry
field, having no form nor comeliness, that men who see should scorn him
less.”

CARPENTER. Hold it fast, now! Nay, don’t let go.

MARY.--

    “He is rejected and despised,
    A man of sorrows, grief his lot,
    He came to us unrecognized,
    Despising, we esteemed him not.
    Surely our sorrows he hath borne,
    And for our sins hath felt the rod,
    Wherefore he seemed a shape for scorn----
    One smitten by the hand of God.
    But he was wounded for our sins,
    For our iniquities was scourged,
    By chastisement our peace he wins,
    And with his stripes mankind is purged.
    All we like sheep have gone astray,
    Turned everyone to his own way.
    And upon him the Lord doth lay
    The iniquity of all.”

 (OLD ANNA _touches her daughter, and points toward the child_.)

MARY. (_After a pause, watching him_)

    My son, what yonder dost thou see,
    That holds thy gaze so steadfastly?
    Come hither, child, and tell it me.

CHILD.--

    I see the land all parched and dry,
    And sheep, without a shepherd nigh,
    And surely some look like to die.

ANNA. I see no sheep.

MARY.--

    Nay, dearest one.
    Thine eyes are dazzled by the sun;
    See, in the field thy playmates run,
    Wilt thou not join them?

CHILD.--

    Mother, nay!
    I will not go with them to-day.

ANNA. He never was a child for play.

CHILD. Mother, what were you reading then?

MARY.--

    Isaiah’s prophecy how men
    Shall still be blind when God again
    Comes to save Zion and redeem
    His chosen ones.

CHILD. Was it a dream?
    Or did he see? How did he know?

MARY. He heard God’s word, and told men so.

CHILD. And was that many years ago?

MARY. Seven hundred years.

CHILD.--

    But having here
    His word to guide them, do men fear
    They will not see Salvation near?

ANNA. Aye! many fear it. I for one.

CARPENTER. There, that’s right! Now, ’tis almost done.

 (_The child turns towards the carpenter’s bench._)

MARY. Thou will not miss that sight, my son.

CARPENTER.--

    Come, little son, and hold the wood!
    Brace hard the end, while I make good
    The upright. See how crooked it stood!

CHILD. What art thou making, father?

CARPENTER.--

    Nay,
    See for thyself, my child, what way
    One grows to wisdom day by day.
    It is a door.

 (REUBEN _goes and takes a cup, dips it in a bowl of water near the door
     and drinks_.)

CHILD. Whose door?

CARPENTER.

    Why, mine,
    Till I’m paid for it!

CHILD. How came it thine?

CARPENTER. I made it.

CHILD. How?

CARPENTER.--

    Well, first I bought
    The timber; after that I wrought,
    Rough hewed and shaped it, leaving nought
    To chance--so that all parts agree
    When joined together. Dost thou see?
    Art satisfied?

CHILD. (_After a pause_) Who made the tree?

CARPENTER. (_After a pause_) God made the tree, my son.

CHILD.--

    And through
    Long years it put forth leaf, and grew
    In beauty till man came and slew.

 (_He caresses the wood, laying his face upon it_)

CARPENTER. Strange fancies still!

CHILD.--

    And so the tree
    Died, and gave up its life to be
    A door through which man passes free,
    To work God’s will.

CARPENTER.--

    Come, come, you waste
    Your father’s time, my son! Make haste,
    Reuben--we’ve got the lintel placed;
    Bring me the nails.

REUBEN. (_As he brings the nails and drives them in. Sings_)

    Oh, what is yon tree that stands so high
      And stretches its arms in sorrow?
    “Oh, that is the gallows where I must die,
      Where I must die to-morrow.”

    Oh, what hast thou done, my only son,
      That thou shouldst die to-morrow?
    “My life I lend to a well-loved friend
      Who health of me would borrow.”

    If so thou lend to a well-loved friend,
      How heavy must be his sorrow!
    “Ah, say not so, for well I know
      I hang by his hand to-morrow.”

 (_The child has taken the bag of nails from_ REUBEN, _and hands them
     to him, one by one, as he drives them in. One of the nails pierces
     the child’s palm. He bows his head over it._)

CARPENTER.--

    Why, there, there, there! You’ve done it now!
    Reuben, ’twas your fault to allow
    A little child like him to play
    With anything so sharp as they!

 (MARY _comes forward and kneels by the child’s side. She takes his
     hand and tries to staunch the blood_)

    Has it gone far?

MARY.--

    The wound is deep.
    Stay, I will bind it! See you keep
    Your hand up, child. Quick, mother, bring
    Yon water fresh-drawn from the spring
    To wash it clean, for there was rust.

 (ANNA _brings the water bowl, while_ REUBEN _draws forward a low bench
     at one end of which she sets it down_)

    Maybe, upon the iron, or dust
    To cause a festering in the wound.

 (MARY _bathes his hand and binds it. The child closes his eyes and
     sinks against her breast._)

ANNA.--

    Oh! See, he has already swooned
    For loss of blood.

MARY.--

    Nay, nay, ’tis sleep!
    Aye! saw you not how at the leap
    Of first sharp pain his face lit up,
    And how he bowed as to a cup
    His lips, and drained it to the lees?
    So to this spirit now comes ease
    And rest; for surely here he tastes
    Of that dark vintage of the wastes
    Whereto, for mortal need, he hastes.

CARPENTER. Strange words!

MARY.--

    But stranger than all words
    The peace which holds him now and herds
    My lamb’s life with the blessed dead.

 (_She moves to lay him along the bench._ ANNA _spreads a cloak across
     it_)

    Lift off the bowl, and let his head
    Rest so, even so.

CARPENTER.--

    There! Let him lie
    Quiet awhile. Ah! he won’t die
    Of that!

 (_He lays his hand kindly upon his wife, then turns away. Evening has
     begun to close in_)

    Now, Reuben, you and I
    Must stir while daylight yet allows!
    This door is for the High-Priest’s house,
    And should already be in its place
    For now Passover comes apace;
    And last night they sent word to say
    ’Twas to be up before the day,
    So that the lintel beam might bear
    The blood-marks for the coming year.

MARY. Look! There are stains already there!

CARPENTER. I’ll wash them off!

MARY.--

    Nay, let them stay!
    This blood, I trow, was shed to-day
    To take some mortal’s guilt away.

 (_The two men have lifted the door and set it to stand against the
     middle post of the doorway where it makes the form of three crosses
     standing together._)

CARPENTER.--

    Soon through this door the holy feet
    Of Caiaphas in service met
    Shall pass each day to do God’s will.

MARY.--

    And, what he hath ordained, fulfill.
    And some day they shall bring a Lamb
    And slay, and lo, upon the jamb
    And lintel of this self-same door,
    Where blessed blood has been before,
    More blessed blood shall then be spilt
    To take from Caiaphas his guilt.

 (_The men having put away their tools lift the door and carry it
     away._)

ANNA. (_Reading_) “He was taken from prison and from judgment, and who
shall declare his generation? For he was cut off out of the land of the
living, for the transgression of my people was he smitten. And he made
his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he
had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth.”

 (_Voices of water-carriers heard without._)

1ST ANTIPHON. The bows of the mighty men are broken.

2ND ANTIPHON. And they that stumbled are girded with strength.

1ST ANTIPHON. They that were full have hired themselves for bread.

2ND ANTIPHON. And they that were hungry have ceased.

 (_The women pass by._)

1ST ANTIPHON. So that the barren hath born seven.

2ND ANTIPHON. And she that hath many children is waxed feeble.

1ST ANTIPHON.--

    The Lord killeth, and maketh alive.
    He bringeth down to the grave and bringeth up.

2ND ANTIPHON. The Lord maketh poor and maketh rich. He bringeth low and
lifteth up.

MARY. It is the women going to the well.

ANNA. What are they singing?

MARY.--

    Of the joy that fell,
    To Anna for her first-born, Samuel.

ANNA. And thy joy also!

MARY. And the pain as well!

1ST ANTIPHON. He raiseth the poor out of the dust.

2ND ANTIPHON. And lifteth up the beggar from the dunghill.

1ST ANTIPHON. To set them among the princes.

2ND ANTIPHON. And to make them inherit the throne of glory.

1ST ANTIPHON. He will keep the feet of his saints.

2ND ANTIPHON. And the wicked shall be silent in darkness.

1ST ANTIPHON. For by strength shall no man prevail.

2ND ANTIPHON. The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken in pieces.

 (_The voices pass away. It begins to grow dark._)

ANNA. (_Sings as she winds her flax_)

    Little child, lo, I spin
    Flax to clothe thy body in;
    Little child, do not grieve
    Out of this a cloth I’ll weave,
    Make of it a little shirt,----
    What man shall do thee hurt?
    So while it lasts, wear it still,
    What man shall wish thee ill?
    Do not from thy body strip
    This; ’tis human fellowship.

 (_She lays the cloth over the child_)

MARY.--

    When thou to death art bowed
    This web shall be thy shroud.
    So in fellowship with all
    Thy soul shall meet God’s call,
    Oh, then, may my soul, too,
    Wake and see the darkness through
    And my ears, no longer bound,
    List, to the heavenly sound!

 (_A pause._ ANNA _lights a small lamp. As she goes to place it in the
     window she stops. Its light falls on the sleeping child_)

MARY.--

    See, from his face has passed the pain.
    And every sense of heart and brain
    Is gathered unto rest again.
    O son, O child, while round thy sleep
    The peace of God lies folded deep,
    Thou can’st not hear thy mother weep.
    Oh, me, the anguish and the dread
    Of that dark hour which lies ahead
    When I shall see thee lying dead.
    Clay, cold, and all my cares undone!
    O perfect, pure, and stainless one,
    My son, my own, my little son.

 (_A sound of sheep passing is heard. A shepherd stops at the door, and
     looks in. He draws off his hat._)

SHEPHERD. God’s peace be in this house. (_He goes on his way_)

ANNA. Again!

MARY. Who spoke?

ANNA.--

    The shepherd from the plain,
    The stranger, so last night he came
    And stayed to greet us in God’s name,
    Then went.

MARY.--

    And there were others, too,
    Who also stayed.

 (_A stranger passes the door._)

STRANGER. Peace be with you!

MARY. God give you peace. (_She rises and turns_)

ANNA. Nay, he is gone.

MARY.--

    Oh, strange! And more will come anon,
    And each one turning from his way,
    Wilt halt here at the door to say
    Some word, or show by look or sign
    That here peace dwells!

 (_Enter an old man._)

OLD MAN.--

    Yes, peace is thine!
    I would, I would to God, such peace were mine.

 (_Enter a little child, led by its mother. The little one kneels
     beside the bench where the other child is laid._)

LITTLE CHILD.--

    Gentle Jesus, meek and mild,
    Look upon a little child,
    Pity my simplicity,
    And suffer me to come to thee!

 (_The mother lifts the little one from its knees and carries it away._)

OLD MAN. (_Weeping, he stands in the child’s place_)

    I’m an old sinner, oft have I gone the road
    Of mine own will, so now I bear the load;
    And in my body grief has come to pass!
    Surely, the preacher saith, all flesh is grass,
    And goodliness the flower of the field.
    Lo, the wind passeth, and its day is o’er,
    And in his place man’s name is known no more.
    God give us peace.

 (_He kneels. While he speaks others have entered. The scene has grown
     dark. One of the men carries a lantern_)

1ST MAN. The grass withereth, the flower fadeth, but the word of our
God shall stand forever.

2ND MAN. Son of God, shine on us!

 (_All kneel._)

3RD MAN. Lamb of God, look on us!

4TH MAN. Shepherd of men, set thy sign on us!

5TH MAN. And lay thy yoke on us!

1ST MAN. And we will be thankful.

 (_The moon rises. Outside the door, others are seen kneeling: men,
     women and children._)

ALL. Hail, Mary, full of Grace, the Lord is with thee! Blessed art thou
among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb: Jesus. Holy Mary,
Mother of God, pray for us sinners now, and at the hour of our death.
Amen.

 (_One by one the men rise and go out. The crowd outside also
     disappears._ ANNA _goes and closes the doors, and the shutter of
     the window. The house is flooded with moonlight._ MARY _kneels at
     the head of the sleeping child. Voices are heard singing._)

VOICES.--

    Ave Maria, gratia plena, Dominus tecum!
    Benedicta tu in mulieribus, et Benedictus
    Fructus ventris tui, Jesus!


CURTAIN.




THE WORLD’S BEST PLAYS

By Celebrated European Authors

A NEW SERIES OF AMATEUR PLAYS BY THE BEST AUTHORS, ANCIENT AND MODERN,
ESPECIALLY TRANSLATED WITH HISTORICAL NOTES, SUGGESTIONS FOR STAGING,
Etc., FOR THE USE OF SCHOOLS, COLLEGES, AND DRAMATIC CLUBS

BARRETT H. CLARK

General Editor


With the immensely increased demand for new plays for purposes of
production by amateurs comes a correspondingly great demand for a
careful selection of those plays which can be easily and well presented
by clubs and colleges. The plays in the present series have been chosen
with regard to their intrinsic value as drama and literature, and at
the same time to their adaptability to the needs and limitations of
such organizations.

The Series, under the personal supervision of Mr. Barrett H. Clark,
instructor in the department of Dramatic Literature at Chautauqua,
New York, assistant stage manager and actor with Mrs. Fiske (season
1912-1913), now comprises 44 titles, more will make their appearance
during the year. Eventually there will be plays from ancient Greece
and Rome, Italy, Spain, France, Russia, Germany, and the Scandinavian
countries, representative of some of the best drama of all ages and
lands.

Each Play is prefaced by a concise historical note by Mr. Clark and
with a few suggestions for staging.


Plays Now Ready

=INDIAN SUMMER=, a comedy in one act by MEILHAC and HALEVY. This little
play, by two of the most famous writers of comedy of the last century,
has been played at the Comédie Francaise at Paris for upwards of forty
years, and remains one of the brightest and most popular works of the
period. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=ROSALIE=, by MAX MAUREY. A “Grand Guignol” comedy in one act, full
of verve and clever dialogue. Rosalie, the stubborn maid, leads her
none too amiable master and mistress into uncomfortable complications
by refusing to open the front door to a supposed guest of wealth and
influence. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=MODESTY=, by PAUL HERVIEU. A delightful trifle by one of the most
celebrated of living dramatists. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE ART OF BEING BORED=, (_Le Monde où l’on s’Ennuie_), a comedy in
three acts by EDOUARD PAILLERON. Probably the best-known and most
frequently acted comedy of manners in the realm of nineteenth century
French drama. It is replete with wit and comic situations. For nearly
forty years it has held the stage, while countless imitators have
endeavored to reproduce its freshness and charm. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=A MARRIAGE PROPOSAL=, by ANTON TCHEKHOFF, a comedy in one act, by one
of the greatest of modern Russian writers. This little farce is very
popular in Russia, and satirizes the peasants of that country in an
amusing manner. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE GREEN COAT=, by ALFRED DE MUSSET and EMILE AUGIER. A slight and
comic character sketch of the life of Bohemian artists In Paris,
written by one of France’s greatest poets and one of her best-known
dramatists. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE WAGER=, by GIUSEPPE GIACOSA. This one act poetic comedy, written
by the most celebrated dramatist of modern Italy, was the author’s
first work. It treats of a wager made by a proud young page, who risks
his life on the outcome of a game of chess. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE LITTLE SHEPHERDESS=, a poetic comedy in one act, by ANDRE RIVOIRE.
A charming pastoral sketch by a well-known French poet and dramatist.
Played with success at the Comédie Francaise. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=PHORMIO=, a Latin comedy by TERENCE. An up-to-date version of the
famous comedy. One of the masterpieces of Latin drama: the story
of a father who returns to find that his son has married a slave
girl. Phormio, the parasite-villain who causes the numerous comic
complications, succeeds in unraveling the difficulties, and all ends
happily. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE TWINS=, a Latin farce by PLAUTUS, upon which Shakespeare founded
his Comedy of Errors. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE BOOR=, by ANTON TCHEKHOFF. A well-known farce by the celebrated
Russian master; it is concerned with Russian peasants, and portrays
with masterly skill the comic side of country life. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE BLACK PEARL=, by VICTORIEN SARDOU. One of Sardou’s most famous
comedies of intrigue. A house has, it is thought, been robbed. But
through skilful investigation it is found that the havoc wrought has
been done by lightning. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=CHARMING LEANDRE=, by THEODORE DE BANVILLE. The author of “Gringoire”
is here seen in a poetic vein, yet the Frenchman’s innate sense of
humor recalls, in this satirical little play, the genius of Moliere.
PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE POST-SCRIPTUM=, by EMILE AUGIER. Of this one-act comedy Professor
Brander Matthews writes: “... one of the brightest and most brilliant
little one-act comedies in any language, and to be warmly recommended
to American readers.” PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE HOUSE OF FOURCHAMBAULT=, by EMILE AUGIER. One of the greatest of
recent French family dramas. Although the play is serious in tone, it
contains touches which entitle it to a position among the best comedies
of manners of the times. PRICE 50 CENTS.

=MASTER PATELIN, SOLICITOR=, a comedy in three acts. Special version by
BRUEYS. One of the most famous of early French farces. The setting and
character belong to the late Middle Ages. The play is concerned with
the crooked dealings of a clever lawyer. 7 men, 2 women. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=CRISPIN, HIS MASTER’S RIVAL=, a comedy in one act by LE SAGE. A famous
comedy by the author of “Gil Blas,” concerned with the pranks of two
clever valets. 18th century costumes and settings. 4 men, 3 women.
PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE LEGACY=, a comedy in one act by MARIVAUX. A delicate high comedy
of intrigue. Marivaux one of the masters of old French comedy, and this
play is full of deft touches of characterization. 2 women, 4 men. PRICE
25 CENTS.

=AFTER THE HONEYMOON=, a farce in one act by WOLFGANG GYALUI. A
Hungarian farce full of brilliant dialogue and movement. 1 man, 1
woman. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=A CHRISTMAS TALE=, a poetic play by MAURICE BOUCHOR. A beautiful
little miracle play of love and devotion, laid in 15th century Paris. 2
men, 2 women. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=CRAINQUEBILLE=, a play in three scenes by ANATOLE FRANCE. A delightful
series of pictures of Parisian street life, by the author of “The Man
Who Married a Dumb Wife.” 12 men, 6 women. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=JEAN-MARIE=, a poetic play in one act by ANDRE THEURIET. A pathetic
play of Norman peasant life. 2 men, 1 woman. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE REBOUND=, a comedy in one act by L. B. PICARD. A clever comedy of
intrigue, and a satire of social position. 2 women, 5 men. PRICE 25
CENTS.

=THE DOCTOR IN SPITE OF HIMSELF=, by MOLIERE. A famous farce by the
greatest of French dramatists. Sganarelle has to be beaten before he
will acknowledge that he is a doctor, which he is not. He then works
apparently miraculous cures. The play is a sharp satire on the medical
profession in the 17th Century. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=BRIGNOL AND HIS DAUGHTER=, by CAPUS. The first comedy in English of
the most sprightly and satirical of present-day French dramatists.
PRICE 50 CENTS.

=CHOOSING A CAREER=, by G. A. DE CAILLAVET. Written by one of the
authors of “Love Watches.” A farce of mistaken identity, full of
humorous situations and bright lines. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=FRENCH WITHOUT A MASTER=, by TRISTAN BERNARD. A clever farce by one
of the most successful of French dramatists. It is concerned with the
difficulties of a bogus-interpreter who does not know a word of French.
PRICE 25 CENTS.

=PATER NOSTER=, a poetic play in one act, by FRANCOIS COPPEE. A
pathetic incident of the time of the Paris Commune, in 1871. PRICE 25
CENTS.

=THE ROMANCERS=, a comedy in three acts, by EDMOND ROSTAND. New
translation of this celebrated and charming little romantic play by the
famous author of “Cyrano de Bergerac” and “Chantecler.” PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE MERCHANT GENTLEMAN= (Le Bourgeois Gentil-homme), by MOLIERE. New
translation of one of Moliere’s comic masterpieces, a play which is
peculiarly well adapted to amateur production. PRICE 50 CENTS.

=THE HOUSE OF FOURCHAMBAULT=, by EMILE AUGIER. One of the greatest of
recent French family dramas. Although the play is serious in tone, it
contains touches which entitle it to a position among the best comedies
of manners of the times. PRICE 50 CENTS.

=PANURGE’S SHEEP=, a comedy in one Act by MEILHAC and HALEVY. A famous
and often-acted little play based upon the obstinacy of a charming
woman, who is finally induced to marry. 1 man, 2 women. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE LAW-SUIT=, (Der Prozess), a comedy in one act by RODERICH BENEDIX.
A famous comedy by the well-known German-dramatist--author of “The
Obstinate Family,” and “The Third Man.” The play is full of amusing
situations and bright lines. 5 men. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE THIRD MAN= (Der Dritte), a comedy in one act by RODERICH BENEDIX.
A highly amusing little comedy based upon the obstinacy of human
beings, and proves the truth of the saying that “love finds a way.” 3
women, 1 man. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE GENTLEMAN TRADESMAN= (Le Bourgeois Gentil-homme), a comedy in
four acts by MOLIERE. One of the best-known comedies of the celebrated
master of comedy. “The Gentleman Tradesman” ridicules the affectations
of M. Jourdain, a rich parvenu. 9 men, 5 women. PRICE 50 CENTS.

=THE SICILIAN= (Le Sicilien), a farce in two scenes by MOLIERE. One of
the lighter comedies of intrigue. This play is laid in Sicily, and has
to do with the capture of a beautiful Greek slave from her selfish and
tyrannical master. 4 men, 3 women. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=DOCTOR LOVE= (L’Amour Medecin), a farce in three acts by MOLIERE. An
uproarious farce, satirizing the medical profession. Through it runs
the story of a young girl who pretends to be ill in order that she may
marry the man she loves. 5 men, 4 women. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE AFFECTED YOUNG LADIES= (Les Precieuses Ridicules), a comedy in
one act by MOLIERE. The famous satire on intellectual and social
affectation. Like most of Moliere’s plays, the theme in this is ever
modern. 3 women, 6 men. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=I’M GOING!= A comedy in one act by TRISTAN BERNARD. A delightful bit
of comedy of obstinacy and reconciliation. 1 man, 1 woman. PRICE 25
CENTS.

=THE FAIRY= (La Fee), a romantic comedy in one act by OCTAVE FEUILLET.
Laid in a hut in Normandy, this little comedy is full of poetic charm
and quiet humor. The element of the supernatural is introduced in order
to drive home a strong lesson. 1 woman, 3 men. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE VILLAGE= (Le Village), a comedy in one act by OCTAVE FEUILLET. The
author here paints the picture of an elderly couple, and shows that
they have not realized their happiness until it is on the point of
being taken from them. 2 women, 2 men. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE BENEFICENT BEAR=, a comedy in three acts, by GOLDONI. One of the
best-known comedies of the Father of Italian Comedy. A costume piece
laid in 18th century France, the principal character in which is a
good-hearted, though gruff, old uncle. 4 men, 3 women. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=GRAMMAR= (La Grammaire), a farce in one act by LABICHE. An amusing
and charming comedy by one of the greatest of 19th century French
dramatists. 4 men, 1 woman. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE TWO COWARDS= (Les Deux Timides), a comedy in one act by LABICHE.
A very amusing and human little comedy, in which a strong-willed girl
helps her father choose for her the man she wishes to marry. 2 women, 3
men. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE DOCTOR IN SPITE OF HIMSELF=, by MOLIERE. A famous farce by the
greatest of French dramatists. Sganarelle has to be beaten before he
will acknowledge that he is a doctor, which he is not. He then works
apparently miraculous cures. The play is a sharp satire on the medical
profession in the 17th Century. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=BRIGNOL AND HIS DAUGHTER=, by CAPUS. The first comedy in English of
the most sprightly and satirical of present-day French dramatists.
PRICE 50 CENTS.

=CHOOSING A CAREER=, by G. A. DE CAILLAVET. Written by one of the
authors of “Love Watches.” A farce of mistaken identity, full of
humorous situations and bright lines. PRICE 25 CENTS.

=FRENCH WITHOUT A MASTER=, by TRISTAN BERNARD. A clever farce by one
of the most successful of French dramatists. It is concerned with the
difficulties of a bogus-interpreter who does not know a word of French.
PRICE 25 CENTS.

=PATER NOSTER=, a poetic play in one act, by FRANCOIS COPPEE. A
pathetic incident of the time of the Paris Commune, in 1871. PRICE 25
CENTS.

=THE ROMANCERS=, a comedy in three acts, by EDMOND ROSTAND. New
translation of this celebrated and charming little romantic play by the
famous author of “Cyrano de Bergerac” and “Chantecler.” PRICE 25 CENTS.

=THE MERCHANT GENTLEMAN=, (Le Bourgeois Gentil-homme), by MOLIERE. New
translation of one of Moliere’s comic masterpieces, a play which is
peculiarly well adapted to amateur production. PRICE 50 CENTS.

 *       *       *       *       *




 Transcriber’s note

 Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. All other
 inconsistencies are as in the original.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NAZARETH: A MORALITY IN ONE
ACT ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
